[CUBRIDMAN-4] english manual for CBRD-23608 (TDE) (#249)
CUBRID/cubrid-manual: en/security.rst

Authorization
=============

.. _tde:

TDE (Transparent Data Encryption)
=================================

.. _tde-overview:

CUBRID TDE Concept
------------------

CUBRID supports **Transparent Data Encryption (henceforth, TDE)**. TDE means transparently encrypting data from the user's point of view. This allows users to encrypt data stored on disk with little to no application change.

CUBRID TDE provides encryption and decryption at the engine level to minimize performance degradation due to encryption. When a user creates an encrypted table, all relevant user data stored on disk (data at rest) is automatically encrypted. By providing TDE, CUBRID helps users to comply with security regulations and guidelines required in various sites.

**Table Encryption**

In CUBRID, a **table** is the unit for TDE-encryption. To use the TDE feature, create a table using the **ENCRYPT** option as follows. For more information, see :ref:`create-tde-table`.

.. code-block:: sql

	CREATE TABLE tde_tbl (att1 INT, att2 VARCHAR(20)) ENCRYPT=AES;

> When an encrypted table is created, all data related to the table is automatically encrypted when written to disk, and decrypted when read into memory. Related data includes not only tables, but also indexes created on the table, temporary data created while executing queries related to the table, logs created when data is changed, DWB, and backups. For more details, see :ref:`tde-enc-target` and :ref:`tde-restriction`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an encrypted table is created, all data related to the table is automatically encrypted when written to disk; and decrypted when read into memory. Related data includes not only tables but also indexes created on the table, temporary data created while executing queries related to the table, logs created when data is changed, DWB, and backups. For more details, see :ref:`tde-enc-target` and :ref:`tde-restriction`.
```

.. _tde-key:

Key Management
--------------

> CUBRID uses symmetric key algorithms to encrypt the data. Keys used for encryption are managed in two levels consisting of master keys and data keys for efficiency. Master keys managed by the user is stored in a separate file, and CUBRID provides a utility to manage it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CUBRID uses symmetric key algorithms to encrypt the data. Keys used for encryption are managed in two levels consisting of master keys and data keys for efficiency. Master keys managed by the user are stored in a separate file, and CUBRID provides a utility to manage it.
```

.. _tde-2level-key:

2-Level Key Management
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

CUBRID TDE manages keys in two levels as follows:

.. image:: /images/tde_2_level_key.png
  :width: 469
  :align: center
  :alt: 2 Level Key Management Image

> *    **Master key**: A key used when encrypting and decrypting data keys, and is managed by DBA user.

Author: ```suggestion
*    **Master key**: A key used when encrypting and decrypting data keys, and it is managed by DBA user.
```

> *    **Data Key**: A key used when encrypting user data such as table and log, and is managed by CUBRID Engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*    **Data Key**: A key used when encrypting user data such as table and log, and it is managed by CUBRID Engine.
```

Reviewer 2: same for Master Key description

> Data keys are stored within the data volume and are always securely encrypted using a master key when written to disk. The master key is stored in a separate file and it must be managed safely according to a security policy users comply with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data keys are stored within the data volume and are always securely encrypted using a master key when written to disk. The master key is stored in a separate file, and it must be managed safely according to the security policy users comply with.
```

Author: Why `the`? There can be various security policies for each user, I think.

> Managing keys in two levels makes it possible to efficiently perform the key change operation. If there is only a key that encrypts the user data, when you change the key, it takes a long time to work because all the data which has been encrypted has to be read, and decrypted and re-encrypted. Also, the overall performance of the database may be degraded during this process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managing keys in two levels makes it possible to perform the key change operation efficiently. If there is only a key that encrypts the user data, it takes a long time to work when you change the key. All the data that has been encrypted has to be read, decrypted, and re-encrypted. Also, the overall performance of the database may be degraded during this process.
```

- Comment: Sentence might be unclear or hard to follow, to make it short, I rephrased it.

Reviewer: the verb 'makes' shoulds stay as 'makes', my mistake.

.. warning:: **Loss of Master Key**
    
    If the master key is lost, data encrypted by TDE cannot be read or changed.

.. _tde-file-based-key: 

File-based Master Key Management
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Master keys are separately stored and managed as a separate key file so that the user can manage master keys in various ways according to individual security requirements. This key file contains all the information of master keys, so if it is leaked, there may be a security problem, and if it is lost, the encrypted data cannot be read (:ref:`tde-load-failure`). So, be careful to manage this key file.

> By default, the key file is created with the name of **<database-name>_keys** at the location where the data volume is created when creating a database using **cubrid createdb** utility. Without additional configuration for the key file, this key file is automatically used. The location of the key file te be used can be changed by a system parameter. For more information, see :ref:`disk-parameters`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the key file is created with the name of **<database-name>_keys** at the location where the data volume is created when creating a database using **cubrid createdb** utility. Without additional configuration for the key file, this key file is automatically used. The location of the key file can be changed by a system parameter. For more information, see :ref:`disk-parameters`.
```
is it right?

Author: ```suggestion
By default, the key file is created with the name of **<database-name>_keys** at the location where the data volume is created when creating a database using **cubrid createdb** utility. Without additional configuration for the key file, this key file is automatically used. The location of the key file to be used can be changed by a system parameter. For more information, see :ref:`disk-parameters`.
```
This may be correct.

> The key file can contain several master keys (up to 128). A master key among those keys is set on the database to encrypt the database, data keys technically. One master key is created and set by default when the key file is created, and DBA can add, delete, change, and search keys using the TDE utility (:ref:`TDE utility<tde-utility>`). When deleting a key, the key to delete must exist in the key file, and the key set on the database currently cannot be removed. When changing a key to set to encrypt database, both the previously key set on the database and the key to be set must exist in the key file. Through key inquiry, you can check the number of keys and creation time of them, and you can check the current key set on the database and setting time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key file can contain several master keys (up to 128). A master key among those keys is set on the database to encrypt the database, data keys technically. One master key is created and set by default when the key file is created, and DBA can add, delete, change, and search keys using the TDE utility (:ref:`TDE utility<tde-utility>`). When deleting a key, the key to delete must exist in the key file, and the key set on the database currently cannot be removed. When changing a key to set to encrypt a database, both the previously key set on the database and the key to be set must exist in the key file. Through key inquiry, you can check the number of keys and creation time of them, and you can check the current key set on the database and setting time.
```

.. code-block:: bash

	$ cubrid tde --show-keys testdb
	Key File: /home/usr/CUBRID/databases/testdb/testdb_keys

	The current key set on testdb:
	Key Index: 2
	Created on Fri Nov 27 11:14:54 2020
	Set     on Fri Nov 27 11:15:30 2020

	Keys Information: 
	Key Index: 0 created on Fri Nov 27 11:11:27 2020
	Key Index: 1 created on Fri Nov 27 11:14:47 2020
	Key Index: 2 created on Fri Nov 27 11:14:54 2020
	Key Index: 3 created on Fri Nov 27 11:14:55 2020

	The number of keys: 4

.. note:: **Creating a database using an existing key file**

    If you want multiple databases to share an existing or new key file, you can create a database after setting the path of the key file by using the **tde_keys_file_path** system parameter. For more information on the system parameters, see :ref:`other-parameters`.

.. _tde-enc-target:

Encryption Target
-----------------

.. _tde-enc-perm:

Permanent Data Encryption
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The encrypted table data and all index data created on the table are encrypted. For more information on the encrypted table, see :ref:`create-tde-table`.

.. _tde-enc-temp:

Temporary Data Encryption
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In addition to persistent data such as tables, temporary data created during queries related to encrypted tables are also encrypted. For example, all temporary data created in the process of executing a query such as `SELECT * FROM tde_tbl ORDER BY att1` or creating an index on `tde_tbl` are encrypted when it is written to disk. For more information on temporary data, see :ref:`temporary-volumes`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to persistent data such as tables, temporary data created during queries related to encrypted tables are also encrypted. For example, all temporary data created in executing a query such as `SELECT * FROM tde_tbl ORDER BY att1` or creating an index on `tde_tbl` are encrypted when it is written to disk. For more information on temporary data, see :ref:`temporary-volumes`.
```

- comment: here ' the process of' might be unnecessary, consider removing it :).

.. _tde-enc-log:

Log Data Encryption
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Since the data which has to be encrypted may be included in the REDO and UNDO log records generated when the encrypted table is manipulated, all log data related to the encrypted table is encrypted. Encryption is applied to both the active log and the archive log. For more information on log volumes, see :ref:`database-volume`.

.. _tde-enc-dwb:

DWB Encryption
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Persistent data is temporarily written to the Double Write Buffer (DWB) before being written to the data volume. Even at this time, it may be encrypted because the data for the encrypted table can be included. For more information on DWB, see :ref:`database-volume`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Persistent data is temporarily written to the Double Write Buffer (DWB) before being written to the data volume. It may be encrypted even at this time because the data for the encrypted table can be included. For more information on DWB, see :ref:`database-volume`.
```

.. _tde-enc-backup:

Backup Encryption
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If there are encrypted data in data volumes and log volumes, they are also stored as encrypted in backup volumes. For more information on backup, see :ref:`backupdb`.

**Backup Key File**

> The backup volume contains the key file by default. If the backup volume including the key file is leaked, it means the master key is also leaked, so there may be a security problem though the data in the volume is encrypted. To prevent this, you can backup the key file separately by using the **\\-\\-separate-keys** option. However, in the case of separating the key file, it must be managed carefully not to lose the key file for database restore. The separated backup key file is created in the same directory path as the backup volume and has the name **<database_name>_bk<backup_level>_keys**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The backup volume contains the key file by default. If the backup volume, including the key file, is leaked, meaning the master key is also leaked. There may be a security problem even though the data in the volume is encrypted. To prevent this, you can backup the key file separately by using the **\\-\\-separate-keys** option. However, in the case of separating the key file, it must be managed carefully to prevent losing the key file for database restore. The separated backup key file is created in the same directory path as the backup volume and has the name **<database_name>_bk<backup_level>_keys**.
```

Author: I wanted to say `although`. It can be a problem even if the data is encrypted. Using `though` in this case is wrong?

Reviewer: here, I didn't understand you ar etrying to say 'although', so in case of this, I think changing 'though' to 'although' or 'even though' will be better.  'through' is correct but I would recommend 'even though' or 'although' :)

.. code-block:: bash

	$ cubrid backupdb -S --separate-keys testdb 
	Backup Volume Label: Level: 0, Unit: 0, Database testdb, Backup Time: Mon Nov 30 14:34:49 2020
	$ ls
	lob  testdb  testdb_bk0_keys  testdb_bk0v000  testdb_bkvinf  testdb_keys
	testdb_lgar_t  testdb_lgat  testdb_lginf  testdb_vinf

**The key file used to restore**

> The key file separated during backup can be given as the key file to be used for restore by using the **\\-\\-keys-file-path** option (restoredb). If the valid key file does not exist in the specified path, restore fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key file separated during backup can be given as the key file for restoration by using the **\\-\\-keys-file-path** option (restoredb). If the valid key file does not exist in the specified path, restore fails.
```

> If the \\-\\-keys-file-path option is not given, the key file to be used is searched according to the following priority. If the valid key file cannot be found, recovery fails.

Reviewer 3: recovery fails. -> restore fails.

Author: ```suggestion
If the \\-\\-keys-file-path option is not given, the key file to be used is searched according to the following priority. If the valid key file cannot be found, restore fails.
```

*Key file classification*

- Server key file: A key file that is generally used when running the server. It can be set with the tde_keys_file_path system parameter or in the default path same as the data volume.

> - Backup key file: A key file created during backup included in the backup volume, or separated by \\-\\-separate-keys option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Backup key file: A key file created during backup included in the backup volume or separated by \\-\\-separate-keys option.
```

*The priority of the key file to use for restore*

> #.  The backup key file that the backup volume contains

Reviewer 3: It should end with a period.

Author: ```suggestion
#.  The backup key file that the backup volume contains.
```

#.  The backup key file created with the **\\-\\-separate-keys** option during backup (e.g. testdb_bk0_keys). This key file must exist in the same path as the backup volume.
#.  The server key file in the path specified by the **tde-keys-file-path** system parameter.

> #.  The server key file in the same path as the data volume (e.g. testdb_keys).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#.  The server key file in the same path as the data volume (e.g., testdb_keys).
```

  Even if the valid key file is not found, restore could be successful if there is no encrypted data in the backup volume. However, since the key file does not exist, you cannot use TDE functions later.

.. note:: **Incremental Backup**

  When performing restoration using multiple level backup volumes by incremental backup, the backup key file of the level specified by the \\-\\-level option is used. If the \\-\\-level option is not specified, the highest level backup key file is used. If only the key file to be used exists, restore can succeed.

.. note:: **Loss of the backup key file**

  If the backup key file is lost, the restore would fail. However, if the key is not changed, the backup key file of the previous volume can be used by using the \\-\\-keys-file-path option. Also, if the key at the backup time exists in the server key, it can be used for backup recovery. Generally, restore can succeed if any key file that has the key intactly at the backup time is given.

.. note:: **The case in which the key is changed automatically after restore**

>   If the key set on the database does not exist in the server key file at the end of the restoration process, the backup key file is copied to the server key file, and the first key in the key file is arbitrarily set on the database for encrypting the database. This is because the key set on the database may not exist in any key file after the restore is complete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Suppose the key set on the database does not exist in the server key file at the end of the restoration process. In that case, the backup key file is copied to the server key file, and the first key in the key file is arbitrarily set on the database for encrypting the database. This is because the key set on the database may not exist in any key file after the restore is complete.
```

- comment: the original sentence is too long so I split it into two separated sentence while keeping the original meaning.

.. _tde-algorithm:

Encryption Algorithm
--------------------

CUBRID supports the following encryption algorithms for TDE.

**TDE Encryption Algorithm**

=================================  =============  =============
 Algorithm                          Key Size       Option Name   
=================================  =============  =============

>  Advanced Encryption Algorithm      256 bits       AES         

Reviewer 3: Advanced Encryption Algorithm -> Advanced Encryption Standard

Author: ```suggestion
 Advanced Encryption Standard      256 bits       AES         
```

 ARIA                               256 bits       ARIA        
=================================  =============  =============

Advanced Encryption Algorithm (AES) is a specification established by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and is widely used worldwide. It has high stability and many optimizations are supported by many platforms such as hardware acceleration, so there is little performance degradation during encryption/decryption. ARIA is one of Korea's national standard encryption algorithms and is optimized for lightweight environments and hardware implementation.

.. note:: **Default Encryption Algorithm for TDE**

  If the algorithm is not specified when creating the TDE encryption table, AES is used by default. If you want to change the default encryption algorithm, you can specify it by the system parameter **tde_default_algorithm**. This default encryption algorithm is used to encrypt logs or temporary data in addition to tables. For details on specifying the encryption algorithm when creating a table, see :ref:`create-tde-table`.

.. _tde-check-enc:

Table Encryption Checking
-------------------------

> You can check whether the table is encrypted or not by following three ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check whether the table is encrypted by following three ways.
```

SHOW CREATE TABLE
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: sql
    
    csql> show create table tde_tbl1;

    === <Result of SELECT Command in Line 1> ===

      TABLE                 CREATE TABLE        
    ============================================
      'tde_tbl1'          'CREATE TABLE [tde_tbl1] ([a] INTEGER) REUSE_OID, COLLATE iso88591_bin ENCRYPT=AES'

    1 row selected. (0.144627 sec) Committed.

    1 command(s) successfully processed.

Inquiry to db_class
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Encryption of each table and encryption algorithm can be checked by the **tde_algorithm** column of the system catalog **db_class** or **_db_class**. For more information on the system catalog, see :ref:`catalog`.

.. code-block:: sql

    csql> select class_name, tde_algorithm from db_class where class_name like '%tde%';

    === <Result of SELECT Command in Line 1> ===

      class_name            tde_algorithm
    ============================================
      'tde_tbl1'          'AES'               
      'tde_tbl2'          'ARIA'              
      'not_tde_tbl'       'NONE'              

    3 rows selected. (0.057243 sec) Committed.

    1 command(s) successfully processed.

> Using cubrid diagdb Utility

Reviewer 3: Utility -> utility

Author: ```suggestion
Using cubrid diagdb utility
```

.. _tde-ha:

TDE on HA
---------

In a HA environment, TDE is applied independently to each node. This means that for each node, the key file and TDE-related system parameters can be managed independently.

However, the TDE information of the replicated table is shared and the same. So, if the TDE module of the slave node is not loaded, the replication will stop when attempting to manipulate an encrypted table from the master node. In this case, not only the changes to a TDE-enctyped table, but also any subsequent changes cannot be replicated. Afterward, if the slave node's TDE configuration is correct and restarted, replication resumes from the stopped point.

.. _tde-load-failure:

When TDE is unavailable
-----------------------

In the following cases, the TDE feature cannot be used, and an error occurs because the TDE module cannot be loaded correctly.

* When the valid key file cannot be found
* When the key set on the database cannot be found in the key file

Even if the TDE module is not loaded, the server can start normally, and users can access unencrypted tables. This means that all DML and DDL such as SELECT and INSERT only for TDE-encrypted tables cannot be executed.

> However, the case log data has been encrypted is different. If the log data is encrypted when the TDE module is not loaded and the log is accessed by recovery, HA, VACUUM, etc., the system cannot be properly executed and the entire server has no option but to stop running server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the case log data has been encrypted is different. If the log data is encrypted when the TDE module is not loaded and the log is accessed by recovery, HA, VACUUM, etc., the system cannot be properly executed, and the entire server has no option but to stop running the server.
```

.. _tde-restriction:

TDE Restriction
---------------

> In addition to restrictions described above, there are the following.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the restrictions described above, there are the following.
```

#. The replication log is not encrypted in HA.

> #. CUBRID doesn't support the **ALTER TABLE** statement to change the TDE table option, which means you cannot set TDE to existing tables. If you want to do that, you need to move the data to the new table created with the TDE table option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. CUBRID does not support the **ALTER TABLE** statement to change the TDE table option, which means you cannot set TDE to existing tables. If you want to do that, you need to move the data to the new table created with the TDE table option.
```
